the
day they were supposed to make the reactor, or
trial reactor, go critical under the stands in
Chicago, as a member of that team, while he came on
to work in his normal time. But in his briefcase,
they brought along a bottle of wine. So when they
controls were withdrawn and the chain reaction in
fact occurred. And it was shut down and everybody
was elated of course because they had achieved a
chain reaction, the first in the history of the
world.
Gene reached in his briefcase and he got the bottle
of wine and he says, I think this warrants a
celebration. So he passed the wine around and had a
taste of wine there in the reactor under the stands
in Chicago that day. Gene is a really wonderful
person.
I was wondering about your thoughts when Senator
McCarthy again, went against Oppenheimer,
maligned him.
Well,
that's a hard one.
First, it hurts my pride to see whom I considered a
knothead like McCarthy, able to call some man like
Oppenheimer to task.
That seems an injustice to me that I don't stomach
very well.
And of course I felt the same way with McCarthy's
trial of Stevens, who was Secretary of the Army at
that time. And Oppenheimer,
as I said, left himself open for something like
that. And of course McCarthy was going to take
advantage of it, because that's what he was trying
to prove. But I don't think that's the forum for it.
I think it was the forum for it. I don't think it's
the best interest of the nation for him to do it, and
I don't think McCarthy is qualified to do it, even
if Oppenheimer was guilty of it,
which he may have been, as far as I know. Did the Air
Force see Oppenheimer as a threat because he was
against development of the H-bomb? No, not
really, because Oppenheimer was not a pinnacle of
his own on that.
When the Air Force looked at that,
more in the sense that these people had created
something that they didn't know what to do with,
and they wanted to keep the closet door closed just
as long as they could do it. We said to ourselves, we
can understand that desire, but we think it's
unrealistic. And we think that the security
interests of the United States dictate that we get
busy. And we have to do it if we can convince the
right people, even though the Oppenheimers and
others don't agree. And we went on that basis. Was
there friction when you worked for Oppenheimer
because the Air Force took a different view than he
did? No. Did he ever, did he ever sort of chide you or
say anything cynical to you about the Air Force?
No. Because he knew that your stand or his, the Air
Force stand was different from his. Oh yes, he knew
the Air Force stand was different from his and he
knew mine individually was.
as of the time the decision was made, Mr. Webster's
position, who was my boss, was contrary to his.
But no, he was never there. He didn't seem to let
those things bother him at all. The fact that I was
opposite to him on that And as soon as the President
said, we're going to go ahead,
well, he forgot about it. He got busy going ahead.
Now, I can't be critical of anything he did after
that insofar as keeping us from getting there. He
went on and contributed his best knowledge, I
think, to us.
So I can't say that he held out. They did just a
different tribute. I sometimes feel that most of
those guys felt like they had to take that
position, and they hoped the president would
overrule them, and their conscience would be
clear, and everything would be all right. Really,
I don't say that specifically about Oppenheimer,
but I mean, I think a number of them felt that way.
And I think that's the reason they took the
position. They had a pretty good idea Truman was
gonna ride over it anyhow. He had decided to drop
it, which was the hardest thing. Yeah, drop the
bomb, exactly. Now let's get back to your job as air
planner. And you said that the impact of the atomic
bomb was one of the more significant aspects and
was very significant and changed war plans. In
what way?
What I really meant was the advent of the atomic
bomb changed one of the things that changed every
war plan that you try to make, because you have to
take account of something that had not existed
before. Take account of it in terms of what you
could do with it if you had it. And of course, we were
planning to have it, because we were building it.
And
the effect on other forces that didn't have it.
But in the U.S. Armed Forces, no one at the start had
the capability to use it, except the Air Force and
the form that it was in. We knew that was not a good
form to have it in, so everybody wanted to get in a
position to use it. That's the scramble for
nuclear torpedoes, nuclear guns, nuclear
propelled airplanes, nuclear V1s, V2s,
all kinds of applications. Delivery systems. And
we pursued all of those. Now, of course, the period
from Potsdam in July of August 1945 down to the
Fulton speech, the so-called Iron Curtain speech
of Winston Churchill, which was in March of 1946,
just a month or so after you assumed your position,
was a period in which American foreign policy was
changing rapidly toward the Soviet Union. We were
becoming very disillusioned with what the
Soviets were doing in Eastern Europe. And then a
year after that, in March of 1947, we get the Truman
Doctrine, I would think that sometime in 1946 the
United States starts to develop
plans to bomb the Soviet Union. Do you remember
when that was? Well,
war plans except for
contingencies like scrambles in the Middle East,
things like that, all
involved the Soviet Union because it was the only
potential adversary that there was. And
so we as air planters began to to use them in our
plans just as fast as they were available.
Probably a little faster, as a matter of fact,
because not all of us knew how many was available or
when.
How many bombs were available. Yes. Of course,
that's all you had. There wasn't a question of it.
What about as far as Soviet targets? What were the
major targets back then? I wonder if those have
changed over the years. Well, Soviet targets have
changed, of course, almost directly as the
numbers increase, because you can achieve, have a
lot more flexibility and achieve an objective by
doing that.
To say that there was a target list in which things
were targeted that early would be an error. They
won. When did we get a list like that, do you think?
Well, I can't answer specifically, but it was
after we had a significant number of missiles
capable of reaching it, which was a good many years
later than this. Sure, absolutely.
I was well out of the planning business long before
that happened. Although of course we were,
we were planning targets even then, but not
targeting is when there is a difference. It takes
years and years to build the information
necessary to do a target system. you gotta know
what's there and that isn't so easy. Right,
absolutely.
And the nature of it and whether you can, what it
takes to destroy it. And were you involved with
those targets within Russia? Picking out which
targets should be hit in case of a war or how many,
well at that time all we had was B-29s, how many
B-29s should go? Oh yes, all of these things have to
be included in every war plan.
The answer is yes. Okay. There was another thing
that I was interested in, and that was increasing
American British relations after the war. I've
done some research in this and it appeared that
right after the war, in the fall of 1945, Americans
were not so concerned with continuing the joint
relationship that we had in Europe, especially
with the British, which was so very close. We
weren't so concerned until 1946 when we realized
that the Soviet Union was our new number one enemy,
and relations improved rapidly. Did you find that
relations improved as far as the Royal Air Force
and the American Air Force throughout 1946? Yes,
it improved between the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
the British Chiefs of Staff, which is where I was.
The planning groups of the two entities met, I know
I don't start to say regularly, that isn't quite
right, but quite often. Every week or so? No, every
month or so. And
would pursue various aspects of joint And
toward the Soviet Union for the most part. Yes. Oh,
yes. Essentially all of it. But it's more
examining what are the capabilities to do this or
what are the capabilities to do that. I'm sure
individually we integrated those into our own
plans back here. But we didn't sit down with the
British and make a joint, or combined it would be in
this case, plan for any kind of offensive action
against the Soviet Union. But was it understood
that in case of some sort of crisis then it would be a
joint action? Well, yes, and there were a lot of
joint things going on. We still had forces in
England, air forces. Actually, I guess still
have. We did for a monument many years after that.
And so there was concerted plans for employment of
those forces. And if you employ a party of forces,
while the others have sure got to be in that stint.
Now did the British have an office right in the
Pentagon?
I don't know about the Pentagon. The Joint Chiefs
of Staff at that time were over where the State
Department headquarters is now, and there were
two British missions here in Washington. I'm not
sure if they were in either of those buildings, but
They
were in the British Embassy and in buildings
leased by the British Embassy. So they were always
close at hand. Yes, they were in Washington,
although to my memory they were not in that
building. I don't remember their being there. Now
in August, September of 1946, Field Marshal
Montgomery visited Washington, D.C. and he had
been in Canada talking to their military men and
then he came down to Washington and talked to
Admiral Leahy and some of our Joint Chiefs of
Staff. As a matter of fact, they all took a trip down
to the Potomac and it was supposed to be a social
occasion, but they all talked about joint forces.
Did you remember when he came? Were you at all
involved? I remember when he came but I wasn't
involved at all and I didn't see him. I didn't
prepare any positions for anybody for that
meeting and so I it's just a point in history for me,
I just don't know. Okay. Of course another thing
was increased defense relations with the
Canadians, which eventually led to the
establishment of the Dew Line. Yes, and the North
American Air Defense Command. Yeah. Did you have
any dealings with that? Well, no, not
really. We had a The concept of the due line and all
was prepared primarily by the Joint Strategic
Survey Committee of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. At
the time we were working with them and we worked on
various pieces of that total. But they carried the
ball and
so we didn't have too much to do with it. And after it
was once accepted, Well then even the Joint Staff
didn't have much to do with it. It was taken care of
by the Air Force and carried out. I was in
Washington for nearly 20 years and I was not in the
Air Force any of that 20 years. I was in the Joint
Staff or something having to do with the atomic
energy business or answering to the Secretary of
Defense all those years in there. Air Force
representative, but never was in the Air Force.
Even my last job as commander of the Joint Task
Force 7, I was responsible to the Joint Chiefs of
Staff on the one hand, and to the commissioners of
the Atomic Energy Commission on the other. So
still wasn't in the Air Force.
During 1946 and 1947, one of the major
battlefronts was Greece, and of course the Civil
War in Greece, and that led to the rise of the Truman
Doctrine. I was wondering if you as air planner had
anything to do with helping the Greeks, helping
the government there, giving them air supplies,
helping them in any way train men. I know they did
send some Greeks over here to become pilots. They
did. And so far as the Joint Staff was concerned,
that again was a Joint Strategic Survey paper. And
then they The actions were carried out by the
executive agent, which I guess would have been
Navy in that case. And I didn't have anything to do
with it. I had a little bit to do with getting the
papers ready for the president to look at and
finally approve. But it wasn't substantive. I
didn't make a bunch of the decisions that went into
it. Of course, in the White House at this time was
Admiral Light. You must have met him. Yeah. Can you
describe that man? Could you describe him? I've
read his memoirs and read his personal papers and
I'd just like to have someone who knew him talk
about him. Well, I don't know him that well. I
thought he was a wonderful gentleman, as far as I
was concerned, and a damn good naval officer. He
could see both sides of the picture and did and he
weren't automatically no damn good if you had
something besides a Navy uniform
on, which was not the case with some others of them I
could mention. So, I just thought he was a fine man,
a fine officer and I really don't have a a good
evaluation of his capability that I don't have a
firm opinion about. I liked him very much, but that
was about all I knew about him. Another man of
course is Harry Truman. You've met the President
and I knew that I've talked to a number of diplomats
who are at the State Department or on duty during
the Truman period and by the State Department it
seems to me unanimously thought he was an
excellent President because he gave so much Well,
because of the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall
Plan, and because he gave the department itself so
much responsibility. How did the Air Force feel?
The Air Force felt that he was a
very good person, too.
I think any president would have had a hard time
untangling all of the goddamn problems that were
presented to him by defense at that time, by the
three services, I should say. And what most
presidents would feel like, I suspect, is
grabbing them all free by the scuff of the neck and
kicking the seat of their britches and telling
them to go take care of their own marble.
I think the Air Force had a very great deal of
respect for his views and I think he treated them
well and he did make the decision that was critical
to
him that related to that Beat 36 controversy and
more importantly to the primacy and the
intercontinental ballistic missile area. they
thought a great deal of. My contact with him was on
atomic matter rather than than military matter.
And
I thought he was wonderful because he could make
decisions and he'd make them stick. And it didn't
make too goddamn much difference to him
apparently whether Joe Blow really thought it was
a great deal or not. He thought it was the way it
ought to be, why he'd do it. And that's what you
needed. God, I'd rather see a wrong decision than
no damn decision.
So I thought he was a quite great president in terms
of not only the substance of the policies that he
put out, but by the manner of getting there and the
manner of implementing it. I think it was too bad
that he was shoved so quickly into the Potsdam
situation, because I think with a bit of time and
education, he could have probably done a better
job than he did there. Boy, I sure can't blame him
for it, but he just didn't have a chance. He was new
to this scene. And he did have some hangers around
like Averell Harriman and a few others that I
wouldn't want to depend on their advice, but he
didn't have any other, any other place to go for it.
And why do you say that about Harriman? I just
don't, I just don't buy his approach, that's all.
I think he saw the Russians as they were so
different than I see them.
He saw them as someone we would live with and get
along all right with. I don't see that. OK. Now, as
far as being in Washington as the air planner, I've
talked to your office with the Joint Chiefs of
Staff was either at the old State Department
building or in the Pentagon. Is that not right?
Yes. Both. Both. Now, I've talked to a number of
officers Many of them were at the Pentagon from
major to brigadier general and somewhere in
there. And they've always said that working in
Washington, the schedules are just absolutely
incredible. A lot of long hours and seven days a
week. Is that what you found? Could you describe
your daily routine for me? Yes, on the joint staff.
There was always, of course, a lot more work than
could be accomplished. And we did the best we
could. But if there was some problem with some
urgency, you stayed there until you got it out. And
I have been in boat building, in the Pentagon in
particular, for 72 hours at a time, many times.
until we could get out a war plan or get out a plan to
meet some other problem that the Joint Chiefs had
referred to us. And you just work until you get it
done. Doesn't make a damn whether it's five
o'clock or midnight. That's the same thing I
heard. And the Joint Staff is not the only place
that happens. It happens in lots of places around
here. In the Atomic Energy Commission, my hours
were mighty long. Usually in the office by 7 and
I'll sort them ever out by 10. Sometimes a damn cent
later than that. I said, it's a killer. After 20
years, you've got enough of it. That got me against
Dubai a bit. Now I was wondering about another
thing. Did you say before that you had been
court-martialed or almost court-martialed
twice? Or are you kidding me? Yes.
It's stretching the point a little bit as an
individual to say that in connection with the Air
Force trying to get loose. All of us were on a
mission out of Hamilton Field and went out to sea to
intercept a Navy ship that was coming in from the
Philippines. When was
this? In 37.
At that time, the Air Force was confined to the
three-mile limit, mission-wise.
We felt we had to break out of that. If the Navy could
keep us confined to the three-mile limit, it
dictated the kind of airplanes we needed,
everything. And people didn't think we could go
out. a side of land because we'd get lost or some
damn thing.
And we wanted to show that we could and that we could
do something when we got out there. So we vetted out
and went out, I think it was six hundred miles,
quite a way, over the ocean in a land airplane and
dropped a slick, a bucket of aluminum powder got
near this thing and bombed it and turned around and
came back home.
The Secretary of War knew all about this by the time
we got home. And the commander of that flight was
already ordered to Washington before he landed.
And
it looked like the whole damn bunch of us were going
to be court-martialed.
It got taken care of in a rational way, so it's not
quite fair to say it almost got court-martialed.
The idea was the same, because it was a
court-martialable offense
to fly past the three-mile limit, you see. This is
what it all boils back down to in terms of
emissions. And that just had to be changed. So that
was the first of four or five attempts before we got
it changed. And it
really never got formally changed. It just people
shut up about it, and we went on better than
it was. As the war got closer, 37, you see, is not
very far from the time things were beginning to get
pretty hot.
The mission off-coast, which was a follow-up on
this, when we were authorized to go out and
intercept the Navy ship.
and we had the worst goddamn weather you can think
of.
And the Navy gave us the wrong information on the
ship, unless that really kind of famous one where
LeMay was the navigator. And he took the outfit out
and found a damn thing anyhow and bombed it. After
that, I don't know, people just kind of shut up and
got busy and got on and we built the airplanes to do
what we thought they ought to do.
The story of LeMay is written up in many places and
damps out more accurately than I could tell it. I
wasn't there anyhow. I was
wondering about that other time that you were
almost court-martialed, too. When was that?
Well, that doesn't have anything to do with the Air
Force. Oh, it has to do with the? The State
Department. Oh, are you going to tell me that one? I
was, when I left Panama I went to Central America as
an assistant military attache for air to Central
America and Columbia. And after a year about in
Central America and San Jose, my area was divided
into three districts, three, two more attachés,
and I moved to Columbia, to Bogota. And Spurl
Braden was the ambassador, American ambassador
down there.
Things were getting
pretty warm because that was in
December 40 or January 41, I don't remember now
which, but right at the beginning of 41.
There were a lot of things to do. The Germans were
still flying SCATTA down there. We were pressing
Pan American to make necessary deals to take over
SCATTA, and pressuring the Colombian government
to
to do it, and they finally did, but the damn woods
were full of Germans down there, so everybody was
worried about the Panama Canal and that. So I was
pretty damn busy, and flying a lot of places. I flew
one mission out of there at 2300 miles in an
airplane that would only fly about 750. Oh yeah, we
talked about that. But
it was a, I'd take people from the office with me on
my flights as photographers and other things.
Most of them were men, one of them was a woman.
And the ambassador decided there was something
wrong with that. I never even figured out what he
decided was wrong. But
I was gone until I came to Washington. And when I got
here, I found that he had preferred charges
against me for carrying an unauthorized
passenger. And since they were formal charges, it
wasn't something he could just walk away from. And
so I had to cancel my return to Columbia and stay in
Washington and work like hell to get the thing
handled. And I finally took an appointment with
the Secretary of State,
the gentleman from Tennessee,
to get him taken care of. Cordell Hall. Yeah. My
immediate boss, the military attache, Colonel
Pate, was an old friend of his from Tennessee. And
so when he saw my plight, we went to see Hall because
Spurl Braden worked for him.
We talked a few minutes, told him what the problem
was. He looked out the window and said to my boss,
Ben, have you been devoting the proper time to
meditation recently?
Colonel Pate said, yes, I think I have. And he said,
well, you see you do that. Every man needs that. And
we left. And I didn't hear more about it. He
apparently was, that was my only contact with him,
but he apparently was a wonderful man.
How'd you get, how'd you shift into the atomic
energy business? Well. Your next job starts to
deal with that as military liaison committee, as a
director of that committee to the U.S. Atomic
Energy Commission. Why'd they shift you into
that? The Air Force, of course, was kind of
fighting for its life in the atomic side of the
picture at that time, and all the other services
were too. And the commission had just been born,
actually it was two years old, and
And it went back a little further. When I was here at
A&M, I was in a, graduated as a chemical engineer.
And I don't know whether it was just fourth or fifth
class, maybe, of chemical engineers to come out of
here. I'm not sure exactly where they were, but it
was right there at the front someplace. While I was
here, while I was in senior here, I had to have one
special project.
And being the ambitious type at that time, I
decided I'd make that project an explanation of
Einstein's theory of relativity. As long as
nobody understood it, I don't think Einstein
himself ever claimed he really did. Well, it
shouldn't be any problem for me. Yes, that is very
ambitious. I bet your professors had some raised
eyebrows about that. Well, I noticed a number of
them were on hand when I came to talk about it. All of
these particular projects had to be presented to
the head of the department, Dr. C.C. Hedges, the
head of the Department of Chemistry at that time.
And as I found out, he didn't know anything about it
either, but I didn't enlighten him a hell of a lot.
That's what it amounted to after an awful lot of
work, and I busted my butt on it. And not only did I
not understand it, you couldn't find anything on
it that would help you. I just wasn't available, at
least not in the resources around here. But I went
on and talked about it anyway. I tried to block my
way through, but I couldn't quite do that.
Now, Hedges tried not to laugh, but there was such
that he just couldn't really keep from laughing. I
told myself at that time, God damn it, I will find
out about it when I get to a place where I can.
And so I did, as time went by. And when the atomic
business came up, I thought it was something that I
could understand. And if I understood it
properly, I'd have a hell of a lot better rationale
about something that I thought was going to change
civilization.
Change it maybe more radically than it has. and
something that could be a really good force if
applied there. So I wanted to be a part of that
effort. And so I got busy and learned about
it. And so as a member of the Joint Planning Group, I
went to, as a representative of the Joint Chief, to
the bikini test. And
quite a bit of time in the technical aspects of not
only the weapon but the effects and the tests and
the layout. And of course you get immediately into
the implications or force implications as soon as
you get into those things. And so I just kept, went
on from there. And when it came time to leave the
joint staff.
They asked me to go over there to the executive
director of that committee, and I did.
So you were self-educated then, basically, as far
as— Yeah, and I lived with those guys, and I worked,
and I studied the books, and I studied the history.
brought myself up to date as to where we were in the
atomic business, and then tried to keep abreast of
it from there, straight on forward, and to know the
people who were involved in it. Now as the military
liaison, can you describe exactly what you did?
Well, the Atomic Energy Act of 1947 placed all of
the responsibility for atomic affairs under the
Atomic Energy Commission.
It recognized that there was a military use for
this that had to be protected, but that
temperature of the country and the people at that
time was, for Christ's sakes, let's control this
thing outside the military. and not ever give the
military a means of using this without full
control. As a matter of fact, they wanted to go
further than that and follow the Baruch plan and
fix it so even the United States couldn't do it,
much less its military.
They didn't know how to handle the Department of
Defense, the things that have to go in there that
didn't expect the Atomic Energy Commission to
know exactly what kind of weapons that we want, or
how did the military want it, how to determine how
many of them were needed and what their
characteristics would be and so forth. Yet they
didn't want to deal directly with the military on
the matter. So they formed a law provided for a
committee as a liaison between defense and AEC and
vice versa. And that committee was headed by a
civilian chairman appointed by the president, I
think with the advice and consent of the Senate,
although I'm not sure about that last.
It had a staff of people, military and civilian,
who were full-time. And then the committee of it
itself consisted of two officers from each of the
three services, plus the civilian chairman, plus
two representatives from somewhere else. And
I've forgotten where they were. It wasn't
significant, anyway.
So we met, we the committee, met with the
commission and relayed the needs and desires and
whatnot of the Department of Defense to the
commission as a basis for their action in the
weapons business. This sounds kind of simple, but
it's not really quite that simple because, for
example, one of the first things that happened was
a determination of how many weapons do you need in
the long run. This is, of course, the biggest
question that we're going to have. How many
weapons do you need? Well, nobody knows, but...